PAGES: 18

===== PAGE 1 =====
Writin g the Empirical Jou rnal ArticleDaryl J. B emCornell UniversityPlanning Your Article.2Which Article Should You W rite?     2Analyzing Data     2Reporting the Findings     2How Should You W rite?     3For W hom Should You W rite?     3Writing Your Article4The Shape of An Article     4The Introduction     4The Opening Statem ents     4Exam ples of Exam ples     5The Literature Review     5Citations     6Criticizing Previous W ork     6Ending the Introduction     6The M ethod Section     6The Results Section     7Setting the Stage     7Presenting the Findings     8Figures and Tables     9On Statistics     9The Discussion Section     9The Title and Abstract     10Rewriting and Polishing Your Article11Som e Matters of Style12Omit Needless W ords     12Avoid M etacom ments on the W riting     13Use Repetition and Parallel Construction     13Jargon     14Voice and Self-Reference    14Tense    14Avoid Language Bias     14Research Participants     14Sex and Gender     14Racial and Ethnic Identity     15Sexual Orientation     15Disabilities     16Com mon Errors of Gram mar and Usage     16Compared with versus Compared to     16Data     16Different from versus Different than     16Since versus Because     16That versus Which     16While versus Although, But, Whereas     16Publishing Your Article16References17                                                A version of this article appears in Darley, J. M ., Zanna, M . P., &  Roediger III, H. L. (Eds)  (2003). The Compleat Academic:A Practical Guide for the Beginning Social Scientist, 2nd Edition. Washington, DC: Am erican Psychological Association.

===== PAGE 2 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article2You have conducted a study and analyzed the data.Now it is time to write. To publish. To tell the world whatyou have learned. The purpose of this article is to enhancethe chances that som e journal editor will let you do so.If you are new to this enterprise, you may find ithelpful to consult two additional sources of inform ation.For detailed inform ation on the proper form at of a journalarticle, see the Publication Manual of the American Psy-chological Association (APA, 2001) and recent articles inthe journal to which you plan to submit your manuscript.For renewing your acquaintance with the form al and sty-listic elements of English prose, you can read Chapter 2of the Publication Manual or any one of several stylemanuals. I recom mend The Elements of Style by Strunkand W hite (2000). It is brief, witty, and inexpensive.Because I write, review, and edit prim arily for jour-nals in personality and social psychology, I have drawnmost of my exam ples from  those areas. Colleagues assureme, however, that the guidelines set forth here are alsopertinent for articles in experim ental psychology and bi-opsychology. Similarly, this article focuses on the reportof an empirical study, but the general writing suggestionsapply as well to the theoretical articles, literature review s,and methodological contributions that also appear in ourjournals. (Specific guidance for preparing a literature re-view article for Psychological Bulletin can be found inBem , 1995.)Planning Y our A rticleWhich Article Should You W rite?There are two possible articles you can write: (a) thearticle you planned to write when you designed yourstudy or (b) the article that makes the most sense now thatyou have seen the results. They are rarely the same, andthe correct answer is (b).The conventional view of the research process is thatwe first derive a set of hypotheses from a theory, designand conduct a study to test these hypotheses, analyze thedata to see if they were confirm ed or disconfirm ed, andthen chronicle this sequence of events in the journal arti-cle. If this is how our enterprise actually proceeded, wecould write most of the article before we collected thedata. We could write the introduction and method sectionscompletely, prepare the results section in skeleton form,leaving spaces to be filled in by the specific numericalresults, and have two possible discussion sections ready togo, one for positive results, the other for negative results.But this is not how our enterprise actually proceeds.Psychology is more exciting than that, and the best jour-nal articles are inform ed by the actual empirical findingsfrom  the opening sentence. Before writing your article,then, you need to Analyze Your Data. Herewith, a ser-monette on the topic.Analyzing Data. Once upon a time, psychologists ob-served behavior directly, often for sustained periods oftime. No longer. Now, the higher the investig ator goes upthe tenure ladder, the more remote he or she typicallybecomes from the grounding observations of our science.If you are already a successful research psychologist, thenyou probably haven’t seen a participant for some time.Your graduate assistant assigns the running of a study to abright undergraduate who writes the computer programthat collects the data automatically. And like the moderndentist, the modern psychologist rarely even sees the datauntil they have been cleaned by human or computer hy-gienists.To compensate for this remoteness from our partici-pants, let us at least becom e intim ately familiar with therecord of their behavior: the data. Exam ine them  fromevery angle. Analyze the sexes separately. Make up newcomposite indexes. If a datum suggests a new hypothesis,try to find additional evidence for it elsewhere in the data.If you see dim traces of interesting patterns, try to reor-ganize the data to bring them  into bolder relief. If thereare participants you don’t like, or trials, observers, or in-terview ers who gave you anom alous results, drop them(tem porarily). Go on a fishing expedition for some-thing— anything — interesting.No, this is not immoral. The rules of scientific andstatistical inference that we overlearn in graduate schoolapply to the “Context of Justification.” They tell us whatwe can conclude in the articles we write for public con-sumption, and they give our readers criteria for decidingwhether or not to believe us. But in the “Context of Dis-covery,” there are no formal rules, only heuristics orstrategies. How does one discover a new phenomenon?Smell a good idea? Have a brilliant insight into behavior?Create a new theory? In the confining context of an em-pirical study, there is only one strategy for discovery:exploring the data.Yes, there is a danger. Spurious findings can emergeby chance, and we need to be cautious about anything wediscover in this way. In limited cases, there are statisticaltechniques that correct for this danger. But there are nostatistical correctives for overlooking an important dis-covery because we were insufficiently attentive to thedata. Let us err on the side of discovery.Reporting the Findings. When you are through ex-ploring, you may conclude that the data are not strongenough to justify your new insights form ally, but at leastyou are now ready to design the “right” study. If you stillplan to report the current data, you may wish to mentionthe new insights tentatively, stating honestly that theyremain to be tested adequately. Alternatively, the datamay be strong enough to justify recentering your articlearound the new findings and subordinating or even ig-noring your original hypotheses.This is not advice to suppress negative results. If yourstudy was genuinely designed to test hypotheses that de-rive from a formal theory or are of wide general interestfor some other reason, then they should remain the focusof your article. The integrity of the scientific enterpriserequires the reporting of disconfirm ing results.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article3But this requirem ent assum es that somebody outthere cares about the hypotheses. Many respectable stud-ies are explicitly exploratory or are launched from  specu-lations of the “I-wonder-if ...” variety. If your study is oneof these, then nobody cares if you were wrong. Contraryto the conventional wisdom, science does not care howclever or clairvoyant you were at guessing your resultsahead of time. Scientific integrity does not require you tolead your readers through all your wrongheaded hunchesonly to show—  voila!— they were wrongheaded. A jour-nal article should not be a personal history of your still-born thoughts.Your overriding purpose is to tell the world what youhave learned from your study. If your results suggest acompelling framework for their presentation, adopt it andmake the most instructive findings your centerpiece.Think of your dataset as a jewel. Your task is to cut andpolish it, to select the facets to highlight, and to craft thebest setting for it. Many experienced authors write theresults section first.But before writing anything, Analyze Your Data!End of serm onette.How Should You W rite?The prim ary criteria for good scientific writing areaccuracy and clarity. If your article is interesting andwritten with style, fine. But these are subsidiary virtues.First strive for accuracy and clarity.The first step toward clarity is good organization, andthe standardized format of a journal article does much ofthe work for you. It not only perm its readers to read thereport from  beginning to end, as they would any coherentnarrative, but also to scan it for a quick overview of thestudy or to locate specific information easily by turningdirectly to the relevant section. Within that format, how-ever, it is still helpful to work from an outline of yourown. This enables you to examine the logic of the se-quence, to spot important points that are omitted or mis-placed , and to decide how best to divide the labor of pres-entation between the introduction and final discussion(about which, m ore later).The second step toward clarity  is to write simply anddirectly. A journal article tells a straightforward tale of acircumscribed problem in search of a solution. It is not anovel with subplots, flashbacks, and literary allusions, buta short story with a single linear narrative line. Let thisline stand out in bold relief. Don’t make your voice strug-gle to be heard above the ambient noise of cluttered writ-ing. You are justifiably proud of your 90th percentile ver-bal aptitude, but let it nourish your prose, not glut it.Write sim ply and directly.For W hom  Should You W rite?Scientific journals are published for specialized audi-ences who share a common background of substantiveknowledge and methodological expertise. If you wish towrite well, you should ignore this fact. Psychology en-compasses a broader range of topics and methodologiesthan do most other disciplines, and its findings are fre-quently of interest to a wider public. The social psycholo-gist should be able to read a Psychometrika article onlogistic analysis; the personality theorist, a biopsychologyarticle on hypothalam ic function; and the congressionalaide with a BA in history, a Journal of Personality andSocial Psychology article on causal attribution.Accordingly, good writing is good teaching. Directyour writing to the student in Psychology 101, your col-league in the Art History Departm ent, and your grand-mother. No matter how technical or abstruse your articleis in its particulars, intelligent nonpsychologists with noexpertise in statistics or experimental design should beable to comprehend the broad outlines of what you didand why. They should understand in general terms whatwas learned. And above all, they should appreciate whysomeone— anyone— should give a damn. The introduc-tion and discussion sections in particular should be acces-sible to this wider audience.The actual technical materials—those found primar-ily in the method and results sections—should be aimed ata reader one level of expertise less specialized than theaudience for which the journal is prim arily published.Assum e that the reader of your article in Psychometrikaknows about regression, but needs some introduction tologistic analysis. Assume that the reader of the Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology knows about personperception but needs some introduction to dispositionaland situational attributions.Many of the writing techniques suggested in this arti-cle are thus teaching techniques designed to make yourarticle comprehensible to the widest possible audience.They are also designed to remain invisible or transparentto your readers, thereby infusing your prose with a “sub-liminal pedagogy.” Good writing is good teaching.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article4Writing Y our A rticleThe Shape of an ArticleAn article is written in the shape of an hourglass. It begins with broad general statem ents, progressively narrows down tothe specifics of your study, and then broadens out again to m ore general considerations. Thus:The introduction begins broadly:“Individuals differ radically from  one another in the degreeto which they are willing and able to express their emo-tions.”It becom es more specific:“Indeed, the popular view is that such emotional expressive-ness is a central difference between men and women.... Butthe research evidence is m ixed...”And m ore so:“There is even som e evidence that m en m ay actually...”Until you are ready to introduce your own study in concep-tual term s:“In this study, we recorded the emotional reactions of bothmen and wom en to film ed...”The method and results sections are the most specific, the“neck” of the hourglass:(Method) One hundred male and 100 female undergraduateswere shown one of two m ovies...”“(Results) Table 1 shows that men in the father-watchingcondition cried significantly m ore...”The discussion section begins with the implications of yourstudy:“These results imply that sex differences in emotional ex-pressiveness are m oderated by two kinds of variables...”It becom es broader:“Not since Charles Darwin’s first observations has psychol-ogy contributed as m uch new...”And m ore so:“If emotions can incarcerate us by hiding our complexity, atleast their expression can liberate us by displaying ourauthenticity.”This closing statem ent might be a bit grandiose forsome journals— I’m not even sure what it means— but ifyour study is carefully executed and conservatively inter-preted, most editors will perm it you to indulge yourself abit at the two broad ends of the hourglass. Being dull onlyappears to be a prerequisite for publishing in the profes-sional journals.The IntroductionThe Opening Statements. The first task of the articleis to introduce the background and nature of the problembeing investigated. Here are four rules of thumb for youropening statem ents:1. W rite in English prose, not psychological jargon.2. Do not plunge unprepared readers into the middleof your problem  or theory. Take the time and space nec-essary to lead them  up to the form al or theoretical state-ment of the problem  step by step.3. Use exam ples to illustrate theoretical points or tointroduce unfam iliar conceptual or technical term s. Themore abstract the material, the more important such ex-amples becom e.4. Whenever possible, try to open with a statementabout people (or animals), not psychologists or their re-search (This rule is almost always violated. Don’t usejournals as a m odel here.)Exam ples of Opening Statem ents:Wrong: Several years ago, Ekman (1972), Izard(1977), Tomkins (1980), and Zajonc (1980) pointed topsychology’s neglect of the affects and their expression.[Okay for somewhere in the introduction, but not theopening statem ent.]Right: Individuals differ radically from one another inthe degree to which they are willing and able to expresstheir em otions.Wrong: Research in the forced-com pliance paradigmhas focused on the effects of predecisional alternativesand incentive m agnitude.Wrong: Festinger’s theory of cognitive dissonancereceived a great deal of attention during the latter part ofthe twentieth century.Right: The individual who holds two beliefs that areinconsistent with one another may feel uncom fortable.For exam ple, the person who knows that he or she enjoyssmoking but believes it to be unhealthy may experiencediscomfort arisin g from the inconsisten cy or disharmonybetween these two thoughts or cognitions. This feeling ofdiscom fort was called cognitive dissonance by social psy-chologist Leon Festinger (1957), who suggested that indi-viduals will be motivated to remove this dissonance inwhatever way they can.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article5Note how this last example leads the reader from fa-miliar terms (beliefs, inconsistency, discomfort, thoughts)through transition terms (disharmony, cognitions) to theunfamiliar technical term cognitive dissonance, therebyproviding an explicit, if nontechnical, definition of it. Thefollowing example illustrates how one might define atechnical term (ego control) and identify its conceptualstatus (a personality variable) m ore implicitly:The need to delay gratificatio n, control impulses, andmodulate emotional expression is the earliest and mostubiquitous demand that society places upon the devel-oping child. And because success at so many of life’stasks depends critically upon the individual’s masteryof such ego control, evidence for life-course continui-ties in this central personality domain should be read-ily obtained.And finally, here is an example in which the techni-cal terms are defined only by the context. Note, however,that the technical abbreviation, MAO, is still identifiedexplicitly when it is first introduced.In the continuing search for the biological correlates ofpsychiatric disorder, blood platelets are now a primetarget of investigation. In particular, reduced mono-amine oxidase (MAO) activity in the platelets issometimes correlated with paranoid symptomatology,auditory hallucinations or delusions in chronic schizo-phrenia, and a tendency towards psychopathology innon-clinical samples of men. Unfortunately, these ob-servations have not always replicated, casting doubton the hypothesis that MAO activity is, in fact, a bio-logical marker in psychiatric disorder. Even the gen-eral utility of the platelet model as a key to centralnervous system  abnorm alities in schizophrenia re-mains controversial. The present study attempts toclarify the relation of MAO activity to symptomatol-ogy in chronic schizophrenia.This kind of writing would not appear in Newsweek,and yet it is still comprehensible to an intelligent layper-son who may know nothing about blood platelets, MAOactivity, or biological markers. The structure of the writ-ing itself adequately defines the relationships among thesethings and provides enough context to make the basic ideaof the study and its rationale clear. At the same time, thisintroduction is not condescending nor will it bore thetechnically sophisti-cated reader. The pedagogy thatmakes this introduction accessible to the nonspecialistwill not only be transparent to the specialist, but will en-hance the clarity of the article for both readers.Examples of Examples. When developing complexconceptual argum ents or introducing technical materials,it is important not only to provide your readers with illus-trative examples, but to select the examples with care. Inparticular, you should try to compose one or two exam-ples that anticipate your actual findings and then use themrecurrently to make several interrelated conceptual points.For exam ple, in one of my own studies of trait consis-tency, some participants were consistently friendly but notconsistently conscientious (Bem  & Allen, 1974). Ac-cordingly, we used examples of friendliness and consci-entiousness throughout the introduction to clarify andillustrate our theoretical points about the subtleties of traitconsistency. This pedagogical technique strengthens thethematic coherence of an article and silently prepares thereader for understanding the results. It also shortens thearticle by removing the need to explain the theory once inthe introduction with hypothetical examples and thenagain in the context of the actual results.This article you are now reading itself provides ex-amples of recurring examples. Although you do not knowit yet, the major exam ple will be the fictitious study of sexdifferences in emotional expression introduced earlier toillustrate the hourglass shape of an article. I deliberatelyconstructed the study and provided a sufficient overviewof it at the beginning so that I could draw upon itthroughout the article. Watch for its elaboration as weproceed. I chose dissonance theory as a second examplebecause most psychologists are already familiar with it; Ican draw upon this shared resource without having toexpend a lot of space explaining it. But just in case youare not familiar with it, I introduced it first in the contextof “examples of opening statements” where I could bringyou in from the beginning—just as you should do withyour own readers. And finally, the Bem-Allen article ontrait consistency, mentioned in the previous paragraph,has some special attributes that will earn it additionalcameo appearances as we continue.The Literature Review. After making the openingstatements, summarize the current state of knowledge inthe area of investigation. What previous research has beendone on the problem ? What are the pertinent theories ofthe phenomenon? Although you will have familiarizedyourself with the literature before you designed your ownstudy, you may need to look up additional references ifyour results raise a new aspect of the problem or lead youto recast the study in a different fram ework. For exam ple,if you discover an unanticipated sex difference in yourdata, you will want to determ ine if others have reported asimilar sex difference or findings that might explain it. Ifyou consider this finding important, discuss sex differ-ences and the pertinent literature in the introduction. Ifyou consider it to be only a peripheral finding, then post-pone a discussion of sex differences until the discussionsection.The Publication Manual gives the following guide-lines for the literature review:Discuss the literature but do not include an exhaustivehistorical review. Assume that the reader is knowl-edgeable about the field for which you are writing anddoes not require a complete digest. . . . [C]ite and ref-erence only works pertinent to the specific issue andnot works of only tangential or general significance. Ifyou summarize earlier works, avoid nonessential de-tails; instead, emphasize pertinent findings, relevant

===== PAGE 6 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article6methodological issues, and major conclusions. Referthe reader to general surveys or reviews of the topic ifthey are available. (APA, 2001, p. 16)The Publication Manual also urges authors not to letthe goal of brevity mislead them into writing a statementintelligible only to the specialist. One technique for de-scribing even an entire study succinctly without sacrific-ing clarity is to describe one variation of the procedure inchronological sequence, letting it convey the overview ofthe study at the same time. (You can use the same tech-nique in your own method section.) Here, for example, isa possible summary of a complicated but classic experi-ment on cognitive dissonance theory (Festinger & Carls-mith, 1959):Sixty male undergraduates were random ly assigned toone of three conditions. In the $1 condition, the par-ticipant was first required to perform  long repetitivelaboratory tasks in an individual experimental session.He was then hired by the experim enter as an “assis-tant” and paid $1 to tell a waiting fellow student (aconfederate) that the tasks were fun and interesting. Inthe $20 condition, each participant was hired for $20to do the same thing. In the control condition, partici-pants simply engaged in the tasks. After the experi-ment, each participant indicated on a questionnairehow much he had enjoyed the tasks. The resultsshow ed that $1 participants rated the tasks as signifi-cantly more enjoyable than did the $20 participants,who, in turn, did not differ from the control partici-pants.This kind of condensed writing looks easy. It is not,and you will have to rewrite such summaries repeatedlybefore they are both clear and succinct. The precedingparagraph was m y eighth draft.Citations. The standard journal format permits you tocite authors in the text either by enclosing their last namesand the year of publication in parentheses, as in A below,or by using their nam es in the sentence itself, as in B.A. “MAO activity in some individuals with schizo-phrenia is actually higher than norm al (Tse & Tung,1949).”B. “Tse and Tung (1949) report that MAO activity insome individuals with schizophrenia is actually  higherthan norm al.”In general, you should use form  A, consigning yourcolleagues to parentheses. Your narrative line should beabout MAO activity in individuals with schizophrenia, notabout Tse and Tung. Occasionally, however, you mightwant the focus specifically on the authors or researchers:“Theophrastus (280 B.C.) implies that persons are con-sistent across situations, but Montaigne (1580) insists thatthey are not. Only Mischel (1968), Peterson (1968), andVernon (1964), however, have actually surveyed the evi-dence in detail.” The point here is that you have a deliber-ate choice to make. Don’t just intermix the two formatsrandom ly, paying no attention to the narrative structure.Criticizing Previous Work. If you take a dim view ofprevious research  or earlier articles  in the domain youreviewed, feel free to criticize and complain as strongly asyou feel is commensurate with the incompetence youhave uncovered. But criticize the work, not the investiga-tors or authors. Ad hominem  attacks offend editors andreviewers; moreover, the person you attack is likely to beasked to serve as one of the reviewers of your article. As aconsequence, your opportunity to address—let alone, of-fend— readers will be nipped in the bud. I could launchinto a serm onette on communitarian values in science, butI shall assum e that this pragm atic warning is sufficient.Ending the Introduction. End the introduction with abrief overview of your own study. This provides a smoothtransition into the method section, which follow s immedi-ately:Because this sex difference remains elusive, it seemeddesirable to test Zanna’s parental-role theory of emo-tional expression in a more realistic setting. Accord-ingly, in the study to be presented here, we exposedmen and women to filmed scenes designed to evokeeither negative or positive emotions and assessed theiremotional reactions when they thought they were be-ing observed by one or both of their parents. We alsosought to examine the relation of emotional expressionto self-esteem.The M ethod SectionThe Publication Manual spells out in detail whatneeds to be included in the method section of an article.Here are som e additional stylistic suggestions.If you conducted a fairly complex experiment inwhich there was a sequence of procedures or events, it ishelpful to lead the reader through the sequence as if he orshe were a participant. First give the usual overview ofthe study, including the description of participants, set-ting, and variables assessed, but then describe the experi-ment from the participant’s vantage point. Provide sum-maries or excerpts of what was actually said to the par-ticipant, including any rationale or “cover story” that wasgiven. Describe the relevant aspects of the room . Showsample items from questionnaires, labels on attitudescales, copies of stimulus materials or pictures of appara-tus. If you administered a standard personality test or at-titude scale, describe its general properties unless it isvery familiar (e.g., the MMPI or the F scale). For exam-ple: “Participants then filled out the Marlowe-CrowneSocial Desirability Scale, a true-false inventory thatmeasures the degree to which persons describe them-selves in socially desirable terms (e.g., ‘I have neverlied’).”The purpose of all this is to give your readers a feelfor what it was like to be a participant. (This is true evenif you used non-hum an participants. Thus it is more im-portant to describ e the schedule of reinforcem ent and the

===== PAGE 7 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article7inner dimensions of the Skinner Box— what the anim alactually experienced—then its outer dimensions and thevoltage of the power supply.) Such information oftenbears importantly on the interpretation of the behaviorobserved, and readers should be in a position to arrive attheir own judgm ents about your conclusions.Nam e all groups, variables, and operations with eas-ily recognized and remembered labels. Do not use abbre-viations (the AMT5% group) or empty labels (Treatm ent3). Instead, tell us about the success group and the failuregroup, the father-watching condition and the mother-watching condition, the teacher sample and the studentsample, and so forth. It is also better to label groups ortreatments in operational rather than theoretical terms. Itis difficu lt to remember that it was the high dissonancegroup that was offered the small incentive and the lowdissonance group that was offered the large incentive. Sotell us instead about the $1 group and the $20 group. Youcan remind us of the theoretical interpretation of thesevariables later when you discuss the results.The method and results sectio ns share the responsi-bility for presenting certain kinds of data that support thereliability and validity of your substantive findings, andyou must judge where this inform ation fits most smoothlyinto the narrative and when the reader can most easilyassim ilate it. For exam ple, if you constructed a new per-sonality scale, you need to tell us about its internal homo-geneity and other psychometric properties. If you em-ployed observers, tell us about interjudge agreem ent. Ifyou mailed survey questionnaires, give us the return rateand discuss the possibility that non-respondents differedfrom respondents. If you discarded certain participants,tell us why and how many and discuss the possibility thatthis limits or qualifies the conclusions you can draw. Inparticu lar, assure us that they were not all concentrated  inthe same experim ental condition. (Participants discardedduring data analysis should be discussed in the resultssection.)Discuss participant dropout problems and other diffi-culties encountered in executing the study only if theymight affect the validity or the interpretation of your re-sults. Otherwise spare us your tales of woe. Do tell us thatsome participants fled your high-stress treatment beforeyou could assess their physiological response, but do nottell us that your dog ate your pigeon and you had to redothe experiment or that you couldn’t run particip ants Tues-day night because the custodian inadvertently locked thebuilding.Manipulations and procedures that yielded no usefulinformation should be mentioned if they were adminis-tered before you collected your main data; their presencecould have affected your findings. Usually it will be suffi-cient to say that they yielded no information and will notbe discussed further. You probably do not need to men-tion them  at all if they were administered after you col-lected your main data unless you think that other investi-gators might try to pursue the same fruitless path. Some-times, however, a “null” result is surprising or of interestin its own right. In this case, it should be treated as aregular datum  in your results section.After presenting the methods you used in your study,discuss any ethical issues they might raise. If the researchdesign required you to keep participants uninform ed oreven misinform ed about the procedures, how did you tellthem about this afterwards? How did you obtain theirprior consent? Were they free to withdraw at any time?Were they subjected to any embarrassment or discomfort?What steps were followed to protect their anonymity?Were you observing people who were unaware of thatfact?If your study raises any of these issues, you should beprepared to justify your procedures. Moreover, you needto assure us that your participants were treated with dig-nity and that they left your study with their self-esteemintact and their respect for you and psychology enhancedrather than diminished. If you used non-human partici-pants— especially dogs, cats, or primates— then you needto address analogous questions about their care and treat-ment.End the method section with a brief summary of theprocedure and its overall purpose. Your grandm othershould be able to skim the method section without readingit; the final paragraph should bring her back “on line.”The Results SectionIn short articles or reports of single empirical studies,the results and discussion are often combined. But if youneed to integrate several different kinds of results or dis-cuss several general matters, then prepare a separate dis-cussion section. There is, however, no such thing as apure results section without an accompanying narrative.You cannot just throw numbers at readers and expectthem  to retain them  in memory until they reach the dis-cussion. In other words, write the results section in Eng-lish prose.Setting the Stage. Before you can present your re-sults, there are two prelim inary matters that need to behandled. First, you should present evidence that yourstudy successfully set up the conditions for testing yourhypotheses or answering your questions. If your studyrequired you to produce one group of particip ants in ahappy mood and another in a depressed mood, show us inthis section that mood ratings made by the two groupswere significantly different. If you divided your partici-pants into groups, assure us that these groups did not dif-fer on some unintended variable that might bear upon theinterpretation of your results (e.g., social class, intelli-gence). If your study required you to misinform  partici-pants about the procedures, how do you know that theywere not suspicious, that participants who participatedearlier had not inform ed participants who participatedlater, and that your “cover story” produced the state ofbelief required for the test of your hypotheses?

===== PAGE 8 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article8Here is also where you can put some of the data dis-cussed in “The Method Section”: Reliabilities of testinginstruments, judges, and observers; return rates on mailsurveys; and participant dropout problem s.Not all of these matters need to be discussed at thebeginning of the results section. In addition to data youthink fit better in the method section, some of these othermatters might better be postponed until the discussionsection when you are considering alternative explanationsof your results (e.g., the possibility that some participantsbecam e suspicious). Again, the decision of what to in-clude is very much a matter of judgment. It is an impor-tant step, but do not overdo it. Get it out of the way asquickly as possible and get on with your story.The second preliminary matter to deal with is themethod of data analysis. First, describ e any overall proce-dures you used to convert your raw observations intoanalyzable data. How were responses to your mail surveycoded for analysis? How were observers’ ratings com-bined? Were all measures first converted to standardscores? Some of these may also fit better into the methodsection and need not be repeated. Similarly, data-combining procedures that are highly specific can bepostponed. If you combined three measures of anxietyinto a single composite score for analysis, tell us aboutthat later when you are about to present the anxiety data.Next, tell us about the statistical analysis itself. If thisis standard, describe it briefly (e.g., “All data were ana-lyzed by two-way analyses of variance with sex of par-ticipant and mood induction as the independent vari-ables”). If the analysis is unconventional or makes certainstatistical assumptions your data might not satisfy, how-ever, discuss the rationale for it, perhaps citing a referencefor readers who wish to check into it further. If yourmethod of analysis is new or likely to be unfam iliar toreaders of the journal, you might need to provide a fullexplanation of it. Sometimes the quantitative treatment ofdata is a major part of an article’s contribution. Variationsof multidimensional scalin g, causal modeling, and cir-cumplex representations of personality data, for exam ple,have been more important in some articles than the data towhich they were applied. In these cases, the method ofanalysis and its rationale have the same epistemologicalstatus as a theory and should be presented in the introduc-tion to the article.And finally, if the results section is complicated ordivided into several parts, you may wish to provide anoverview of the section: “The results are presented inthree parts. The first section presents the behavioral re-sults for the men, followed by the parallel results for thewomen. The final section presents the attitudinal andphysiological data for both sexes combined.” But as Ishall argue, this kind of “metacommentary” should beused sparingly. In most cases, the prose itself shouldmake it unnecessary.Presen ting the Findings. The general rule in report-ing your findings is to give the forest first and then thetrees. This is true of the results section as a whole: Beginwith the central findings, and then move to more periph-eral ones. It is also true within subsections: State the basicfinding first, and then elaborate or qualify it as necessary.Similarly, discuss an overall measure of aggression orwhatever first, and then move to its individual compo-nents. Beginning with one of your most central results,proceed as follows:1. Remind us of the conceptual hypothesis or thequestion you are asking: “It will be recalled that the menare expected to be more emotionally expressive than thewomen.” Or, “We ask, first, whether the men or thewomen are more emotionally expressive?” Note that thisis a conceptual statem ent of the hypothesis or question.2. Remind us of the operations performed and be-haviors measured: “In particular, the men should producemore tears during the showing of the film than thewomen.” Or, “Do the men produce more tears during theshowing of the film than the women?” Note that this is anoperational statem ent of the hypothesis or question.3. Tell us the answer immediately and in English:“The answer is yes.” Or, “As Table 1 reveals, men do, infact, cry m ore profusely than the wom en.”4. Now, and only now, speak to us in numbers. (Yourgrandm other can now skip to the next result in case shehas forgotten her statistics or her reading glasses.): “Thusthe men in all four conditions produced an average of 1.4cc more tears than the wom en, F (1,112) = 5.79, p <.025.”5. Now you may elaborate or qualify the overall con-clusion if necessary: “Only in the father-watching condi-tion did the men fail to produce more tears than thewom en, but a specific test of this effect failed to reachsignificance, t =1.58, p < .12.”6. End each section of the results with a summary ofwhere things stand: “Thus, except for the father-watchingcondition, which will be discussed below, the hypothesisthat men cry more than wom en in response to visually-depicted grief appears to receive strong support.”7. Lead into the next section of the results with asmooth transition sentence: “Men may thus be more ex-pressive than wom en in the domain of negative emotion,but are they more expressive in the domain of positiveemotion? Table 2 show s they are not...” (Again, the“bottom  line” is given immediately.) As the results sec-tion proceed s, continue to summarize and “update” thereader’s store of information frequently. The readershould not have to keep looking back to retrieve the majorpoints of your plot line.By structuring the results section in this way, bymoving from forest to trees, by announcing each resultclearly in prose before wading into numbers and statistics,and by summarizing frequently, you permit a reader todecide just how much detail he or she wants to pursue ateach juncture and to skip ahead to the next main pointwhenever that seem s desirable.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article9Figures and Tables. Unless a set of findings can bestated in one or two numbers, results that are sufficientlyimportant to be stressed should be accompanied by a fig-ure or table summarizing the relevant data. The basic ruleof presentation is that a reader be able to grasp your majorfindings either by reading the text or by looking at thefigures and tables. Thus, figures and tables must be titledand labeled clearly and completely, even if that meansconstructing a lengthy title or heading (“Mean number oftears produced by two affective films as a function ofaffect valence, participant sex, parental observation, andself-esteem”). Within the text itself, lead the reader by thehand through a table to point out the results of interest:“As shown in the first column of Table 2, men producemore tears (2.33 cc) than women (1.89 cc).... Of particularinterest is the number of tears produced when both fatherand mother watch (rows 3 and 4)...” Do not just wave inthe general direction of the table and expect the reader toferret out the information. For detailed information onfigures and tables, see the Publication Manual (APA,2001).On Statistics. As you know, every comparison be-tween groups or relationship between variables should beaccompanied by its level of statistical significance. Oth-erwise, readers have no way of knowing whether thefindings could have emerged by chance. But despite theimportance of inferential statistics, they are not the heartof your narrative and should be subordinated to the de-scriptive results. Whenever possible, state a result firstand then give its statistical significan ce, but in no caseshould you ever give the statistical test alone without in-terpretin g it substantively. Do not tell us that the three-way interaction with sex, parent condition, and self-esteem  was significant at the .05 level unless you tell usimmediately and in English that men are less expressivethan women in the negative conditions if fatherwatches— but only for m en with low self-esteem .If your experiment used an analysis of variance de-sign, your data analysis will automatically  display theeffects of several independent variables on a single de-pendent variab le. If this organizatio n is consonant with asmooth presentation of your results, lucky you. Go with it.But do not be a prisoner of ANOVA! If the narrativeflows more smoothly by discussing the effects of a singleindependent variable on several conceptually related de-pendent variables, tear your ANOVA results apart andreorganize them . Statistical designs are all right in theirplace, but you— and your prose— are master; they areslave.Just as your method section should give readers a feelfor the procedures used, so too, the results section shouldgive them a feel for the behavior observed. Select de-scriptive indexes or statistics that convey the behavior ofyour participants as vividly as possible. Tell us the per-cent of children in your study who hit the Bobo doll or themean number of times they did so. Remind us that a scoreof 3.41 on your 5-point rating scale of aggression liesbetween “slightly aggressive” and “moderately aggres-sive.”Do this even if the statistical analyses must be per-form ed on some more indirect datum  (e.g., the arcsintransform of the number of Bobo hits or the sum of threestandardized aggression scores.) Display these indirectindexes, too, if you wish, but give the readers’ intuitionsfirst priority. For exam ple, in our study of trait consis-tency, we analyzed a standard-score index of individualconsistency, but we discussed the results in terms of themore familiar correlation coefficient— on which no le-gitimate statistical analysis could be performed (Bem &Allen, 1974).After you have presented your quantitative results, itis often useful to become more informal and briefly todescribe the behavior of particular individuals in yourstudy. Again, the point is not to prove something, but toadd richness to your findings, to share with readers thefeel of the behavior: “Indeed, two of the men used an en-tire box of Kleenex during the showing of the heart op-eration but would not pet the baby kitten owned by thesecretary.”The Discussion SectionAs noted earlier, the discussion section can either becombined with the results section or appear separately. Ineither case, it form s a cohesive narrative with the intro-duction, and you should expect to move materials backand forth between these two sections as you rewrite andreshape the report. Topics that are central to your storywill appear in the introduction and probably again in thediscussion. More peripheral topics may not be brought upat all until after the presentation of the results. The discus-sion is also the bottom  of the hourglass-shaped form at andthus proceeds from specific matters about your study tomore general concerns (about methodological strategies,for example) to the broadest generalizations you wish tomake. The sequence of topics is often the mirror image ofthe sequence in the introduction.Begin the discussion by telling us what you havelearned from the study. Open with a clear statement onthe support or nonsupport of the hypotheses or the an-swers to the questions you first raised in the introduction.But do not simply reformulate and repeat points alreadysummarized in the results section. Each new statementshould contribute something new to the reader’s under-standing of the problem. What inferences can be drawnfrom the findings? These inferen ces may be at a levelquite close to the data or may involve considerable ab-straction, perhaps to the level of a larger theory regarding,say, emotion or sex differences. What are the theoretical,practical, or even the political im plications of the results?It is also appropriate at this point to compare your re-sults with those reported by other investigators and todiscuss possible shortcom ings of your study, conditionsthat might limit the extent of legitim ate generalization orotherwise qualify your inferences. Remind readers of the

===== PAGE 10 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article10characteristics of your participant sample, the possibilitythat it might differ from  other populations to which youmight want to generalize; of specific characteristics ofyour methods that might have influenced the outcome; orof any other factors that might have operated to produceatypical results.But do not dwell compulsively on every flaw! In par-ticular, be willing to accept negative or unexpected resultswithout a tortured attem pt to explain them away. Do notmake up long, involved, pretzel-shaped theories to ac-count for every hiccup in the data. There is a -.73 correla-tion betw een the clarity of an investigator’s results andthe length of his or her discussion section. Do not con-tribute to this sham eful statistic.Ah, but suppose that, on the contrary, your resultshave led you to a grand new theory that injects startlingclarity into your data and revolutionizes your view of theproblem area. Doesn’t this justify a long discussion sec-tion? No. In this case, you should write the article so thatyou begin with your new theory. As noted above, yourtask is to provide the most informative and compellingfram ework for your study from the opening sentence. Ifyour new theory does that, don’t wait until the discussionsection to spring it on us. A journal article is not a chro-nology of your thought processes.The discussion section also includes a considerationof questions that remain unanswered or that have beenraised by the study itself, along with suggestions for thekinds of research  that would help to answer them. In fact,suggesting additional research is probably the most com-mon way of ending a research report.Common, but dull. The hourglass shape of an articleimplies that your final words should be broad generalstatem ents of near-cosm ic significance, not precious de-tails of interest only to psychologists. Thus the statement,“Further research will be needed before it is clear whetherthe androgyny scale should be scored as a single continu-ous dimension or partitioned into a 4-way typology,”might well be appropriate somewhere in a discussion sec-tion, but, please, not your final farewell. In my opinion,only Montaigne was clever enough to end an article witha statem ent about further research: “Because [the study ofmotivation] is a high and hazardous undertaking, I wishfewer people would m eddle with it” (1580/1943).You should probably settle for more modest injunc-tions: “If gender schema theory has a political message, itis.. .that... human behaviors and personality attributesshould no longer be linked with gender, and societyshould stop projecting gender into situations irrelevant togenitalia. The feminist prescription, then, is not that theindividual be androgynous, but that the society be gender-aschem atic” (S. Bem , 1985).But in any case, end with a bang, not a whim per.The Title and AbstractThe title and abstract of your article permit potentialreaders to get a quick overview of your study and to de-cide if they wish to read the article itself. Titles and ab-stracts are also indexed and compiled in reference worksand computerized databases. For this reason they shouldaccurately reflect the content of the article and includekey words that will ensure their retrieval from a database.You should compose the title and abstract after you havecompleted the article and have a firm view of its structureand content.The recom mended length for a title is 10 to 12 words.It should be fully explanatory when standing alone andidentify the theoretical issues or the variables under in-vestigation. Because you will not be able to mention allthe features of your study in the title (or even in the ab-stract), you must decide which are most important. Onceagain, the data should guide you. For exam ple, the mostinstructive findings from  our fictitious study on emotionalexpressio n should determ ine which of the following is themost appropriate title: “Laughing versus Crying: Sex Dif-ferences in the Public Display of Positive and NegativeEmotions”; “Effects of Being Observed by Parents on theEmotional Responses of Men and Women to VisualStimuli”; “Emotional Responses to Visual Stimuli as aFunction of Sex and Self-Esteem”; “Sex Differences inthe Public Display of Emotion as a Function of the Ob-serving Audience”; “Public versus Private Displays ofEmotion in M en and W omen.”The abstract of an empirical article should not exceed120 words. It should contain the problem under investi-gation (in one sentence if possible); the participants,specifying pertinent characteristics, such as number, type,age, sex, and species; the experim ental method, includingthe apparatus, data-gathering procedures, and completetest names; the findings, including statistical significancelevels; and the conclusion and the implications or appli-cations.Clearly the abstract must be compact, and this re-quirem ent leads many inexperienced writers to make itunintelligible. Remove unnecessary words and eliminateless important details of method and results. But then let itbreathe. In particular, allow  yourself the space to makethe problem under investigation clear to a casuallybrowsing reader. Often you can plagiarize and abbreviatekey statem ents from  the article itself. Here is an exam ple:When are men more emotionally expressive thanwomen? One hundred male and 100 female under-graduates were individually shown a sad or a happyfilm, while being observed by one or both of their par-ents. Judges blind to condition rated participants’ fa-cial expressions, and a Lachrymeter measured theirtear volume. Men cried more during the sad movie butlaughed less during the happy movie than did thewomen (interaction, p < .02). However, men in thefather-w atching condition with low self-esteem  (Dar-ley Self-Concept Scale) cried less than all other par-ticipants (p < .05). It is suggested that sex differencesin emotional expression are moderated by the valence

===== PAGE 11 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article11of the emotion and— for men— by self-esteem andconditions of being observed.If the conceptual contribution of your article is moreimportant than the supporting study, this can be reflectedin the abstract by omitting experim ental details and givingmore space to the theoretical material. Here is the title andabstract from  our Psychological Review article on traitconsistency (revised to conform to the new 100 wordlimit on abstracts of reviews and theoretical articles):On Predicting Some of the People Some of the Time:The Search for Cross-Situational Consistencies inBehaviorThe recurring controversy over the existence of cross-situational consistencies in behavior is sustained bythe discrepancy between our intuitions, which affirmtheir existence, and the research literature, which doesnot. It is argued that the nomothetic assumptions of thetraditional research paradigm  are incorrect and thathigher validity coefficients would be obtained if theidiographic assumptions used by our intuitions wereadopted. A study is reported which shows it is possibleto predict who will be cross-situationally consistentand who will not. Personality assessment must notonly attend to situations— as has been recentlyurged— but to persons as well (Bem & Allen, 1974).Rewriting and Polishing Y our A rticleFor many authors revising an article is unmitigatedagony. Even proofreading is painful. And so they don’t.So relieved to get a draft done, they send it off to thejournal thinking that they can clean up the writing after ithas been accepted. Alas, that day rarely comes. Some mayfind solace in the belief that the manuscript probablywould have been rejected even if it had been extensivelyrevised and polished; after all, most of psychology jour-nals accept only 15 to 20% of all manuscripts subm itted.But from  my experience as an editor, I believe that thedifference between the manuscripts accepted and the top15 to 20% of those rejected is frequently the differencebetween good and less good writing. Moral: Do not ex-pect journal review ers to discern your brilliance throughthe smog of polluted writing. Revise your manuscript.Polish it. Proofread it. Then subm it it.Rewriting is difficult for several reasons. First, it isdifficult to edit your own writing. You will not noticeambiguities and explanatory gaps because you know whatyou meant to say and you understand the omitted steps.One strategy for overcom ing this difficulty is to lay yourmanuscript aside for awhile and then return to it laterwhen it has become less familiar. Sometimes it helps toread it aloud. But there is no substitute for practicing theart of taking the role of the nonspecialist reader, forlearning to role-play grandma. As you read, ask yourself,“Have I been told yet what this concept means?” Has thelogic of this step been demonstrated?” “Would I knowwhat the independent variable is at this point?” This isprecisely  the skill of the good lectu rer in Psychology 101,the ability to anticipate the audience’s level of under-standing at each point in the presentation. Good writing isgood teaching.But because this is not easy, you should probablygive a fairly polished copy of the manuscript to a friend orcolleague for a critical review . (If you get a critique fromtwo colleagues you will have simulated a trial run of ajournal’s review process.) The best readers are those whohave them selves published in the psychological journals,but who are unfamiliar with the subject of your article. (Astudent from Psychology 101 would probably be too in-timidated to give usefully critical feedback; grandma willbe too kind.)If your colleagues find something unclear, do not ar-gue with them. They are right: By definition, the writingis unclear. Their suggestio ns for correctin g the unclaritiesmay be wrong, even dumb. But as unclarity detectors,readers are never wrong. Also resist the temptation simplyto clarify their confusion verbally. Your colleagues do notwant to offend you or appear stupid, and so they will sim-ply mumble “oh yes, of course, of course” and apologizefor not having read carefully enough. As a consequence,you will be pacified, and your next readers, the journalreviewers, will stum ble over the same problem . They willnot apologize; they will reject.Rewriting is difficult for a second reason: It requiresa high degree of compulsiveness and attention to detail.The probability of writing a sentence perfectly the firsttime is vanishingly small, and good writers rewrite nearlyevery sentence of an article in the course of polishingsuccessive drafts. But even good writers differ from oneanother in their approach to the first draft. Some spend along time carefully choosing each word and reshapingeach sentence and paragraph as they go. Others pound outa rough draft quickly and then go back for extensive revi-sion. Although I personally prefer the former method, Ithink it wastes time. For journal articles in particular, Ithink most authors should get the first draft done asquickly as possible without agonizing over stylistic nice-ties. But once it is done, compulsiveness and attention todetail becom e the required virtues.Finally, rewriting is difficult because it usually meansrestructuring. Sometimes it is necessary to discard wholesectio ns of an article, add new ones, go back and do moredata analysis, and then totally reorganize the article just toiron out a bump in the logic of the argum ent. Do not getso attached to your first draft that you are unwilling totear it apart and rebuild it. (This is why the technique ofcrafting each sentence of a first draft wastes time. Thatbeautiful turn of phrase that took me 40 minutes to shapegets discarded when the article gets restructured. Worse, Iget so attached to the phrase that I resist restructuringuntil I can find a new home for it.) A badly constructedbuilding cannot be salvaged by brightening up the wall-paper. A badly constructed article cannot be salvaged by

===== PAGE 12 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article12changing words, inverting sentences, and shuffling para-graphs.Which brings me to the word processor. Its very vir-tuosity at making these cosmetic changes may tempt youto tinker endlessly, encouraging you in the illusion thatyou are restructuring right there in front of the monitor.Do not be fooled. You are not. A word processor—evenin conjunction with a fancy “outline mode”— is not anadequate restructuring tool. Moreover, it can produceflawless, physically beautiful drafts of wretched writing,encouraging you in the illusion that they are finishedmanuscripts ready to be submitted. Do not be fooled.They are not. If you are blessed with an excellent memory(or a very large monitor) and are confident that you canget away with a purely electronic process of restructuring,fine, do it. But do not be ashamed to print out a completedraft of your manuscript, spread it out on table or floor,take pencil, scissors, and scotch tape in hand, and then, allby your low-tech self, have at it.Som e Matters of StyleOmit Needless W ordsVirtually all experienced writers agree that any writ-ten expression that deserves to be called vigorous writing,whether it is a short story, an article for a professionaljournal, or a complete book, is characterized  by the attrib-ute of being succinct, concise, and to the point. A sen-tence—no matter where in the writing it occurs—shouldcontain no unnecessary or superfluous words, words thatstand in the way of the writer’s direct expression of his orher meaning and purpose. In a very similar fashion, aparagraph—the basic unit of organization in Englishprose—should contain no unnecessary or superfluoussentences, sentences that introduce peripheral content intothe writing or stray from  its basic narrative line. It is inthis sense that a writer is like an artist executing a draw-ing, and it is in this sense that a writer is like an engineerdesigning a machine. Good writing should be economicalfor the same reason that a drawing should have no un-necessary lines, and good writing should be stream linedin the same way that a machine is designed to have nounnecessary parts, parts that contribute little or nothing toits intended function.This prescription to be succinct and concise is oftenmisunderstood and requires judicious application. It cer-tainly does not imply that the writer must make all of hisor her sentences short and choppy or leave out all adjec-tives, adverbs, and qualifiers. Nor does it mean that he orshe must avoid or eliminate all detail from the writingand treat his or her subjects only in the barest skeleto n oroutline form . But the requirement does imply that everyword committed to paper should tell something new to thereader and contribute in a significant and non-redundantway to the m essage that the writer is trying to convey.* * *You have just read a 303 word essay on brevity. It isnot a terrible first draft, but a good writer or copy editorwould take its messag e to heart and, by crossing out allthe non-italicized words, cut it by 81% . Savor the result:Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should con-tain no unnecessary words, a paragraph no unneces-sary sentences, for the same reason that a draw ingshould have no unnecessary lines and a machine nounnecessary parts. This requires not that the writermake all sentences short or avoid all detail and treatsubjects only in outline, but that every word tell. [59words]This essay on brevity was written by Strunk andWhite (2000, p. 23) under the heading: “Omit NeedlessWords.” Obey their injunction, because it is the most im-portant piece of advice in this article. Journal articlesshould also omit needless concepts, topics, anecdotes,asides, and footnotes. Clear any underbrush that cluttersyour narrative. If a point seems peripheral to your mainthem e, remove it. If you cannot bring yourself to do this,put it in a footnote. Then when you revise your manu-script, rem ove the footnote.Copy editing other people’s writing is good practicefor improving your own. It is also less painful than editingyour own and much easier than actually writing. Anypiece of prose will do. Here was an exercise for my writ-ing class; it was part of a letter Cornell sent out to poten-tial graduate applicants. You may wish to try your hand atit.Psychology is a wide field of study, and we are notequally strong in all parts of it. At present, we regardour major strengths as lying in three broadly defineddomains in which we have many faculty, and a coupleof smaller areas in which also have appreciable re-sources. The three primary areas are Biopsychology,Experimental Psychology, and Personality and SocialPsychology; the others are Mathematical/DifferentialPsychology and Experim ental Psychopathology. Theareas and the relevant faculty are listed below. Pleasenote that this listing is informal; it does not imply thatthe listed faculty members have no other interests orcan readily be fitted into predefined areas. The actualnetwork of faculty interests and responsibilities is toosubtle to be described in a letter such as this. The list-ing is just a rough and ready way to tell you what theField of Psychology at Cornell is like. [149 words]Here is a reasonable revision:Psychology is a wide field, and our major strengths areBiopsychology, Experimental Psychology, and Per-sonality and Social Psychology. We also have re-sources in Mathematical/Differential Psychology andExperimental Psychopathology. The following list offaculty within areas provides a rough guide to theField of Psychology at Cornell. Faculty interests arebroader than this list implies, however, and do not al-ways neatly fit the predefined areas. [65 words, asavings of 56%]

===== PAGE 13 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article13To maintain the vigor of your prose, try to spend atleast 15 minutes each day omitting needless words. Yourgoal should be to reach at least 30% of all words encoun-tered. (Copy edited versions of this article will be returnedunopened.)Avoid M etacom ments on the W ritingExpository writing fails its mission if it diverts thereader’s attention to itself and away from the topic; theprocess of writing should be transparent to the reader. Inparticular, the prose itself should direct the flow of thenarrative without requiring you to play tour guide bycommenting on it. Do not say, “Now that I have discussedthe three theories of emotion, we can turn to the empiricalwork on each of them. I will begin with the psychoana-lytic account of affect...” Instead, move directly from  yourdiscussion of the theories into the literature review with asimple transition sentence such as, “Each of these threetheories has been tested empirically. Thus, the psycho-analytic account of affect has received support in studiesthat...” Do not say, “Now that we have seen the results fornegative affect, we are in a position to exam ine men’s andwom en’s emotional expression in the realm  of positiveaffect. The relevant data are presented in Table 2...” In-stead use a transition sentence that simultaneously sum-marizes and moves the story along: “Men may thus bemore expressive than wom en in the domain of negativeemotion, but are they also more expressive in the domainof positive emotion? Table 2 shows that they are not...”Any other guideposts needed can be supplied by usinginform ative headings and by follow ing the advice onrepetition and parallel construction given in the next sec-tion.If you feel the need to make metacom ments to keepthe reader on the narrative path, then your plot line isprobably already too cluttered, the writing insufficientlylinear. Metacomments will only oppress the prose further.Instead, copy edit. Om it needless words; don’t add them !Use Repetition and Parallel ConstructionInexperien ced writers often substitute synonyms forrecurring words and vary their sentence structure in themistaken belief that this is more creative, stylish, or inter-esting. Instead of using repetition and parallel construc-tion, as in “Men may be more expressive than wom en inthe domain of negative emotion, but they are not moreexpressive in the domain of positive emotion,” they at-tempt to be more creative: “Men may be more expressivethan wom en in the domain of negative emotion, but it isnot true that they are more willing and able than the oppo-site sex to display the m ore cheerful affects.”Such creativity is hardly more interesting, but it iscertainly more confusing. In scientific communication, itcan be deadly. When an author uses differen t words torefer to the same concept in a technical article— whereaccuracy is paramount—readers will justifiably wonder ifdifferent meanings are implied. The exam ple above is notdisastrous, and most readers will be unaware that theirunderstanding flickered momentarily when the prose hit abump. But consider the cognitive burden carried by read-ers who m ust hack through this “creative” jungle:The high-dissonance participants were paid a smallsum of money while being given a free choice ofwhether or not to participate, whereas the participantswe randomly assigned to the large-incentive treatment(the low-dissonance condition) were not offered theopportunity to refuse.This (fictitious) author should have written:High dissonance participants were paid a small sum ofmoney and were not required to participate; low-dissonance participants were paid a large sum ofmoney and were required to participate.The wording and gram matical structure of the twoclauses are held rigidly parallel; only the variables vary.Repetition and parallel construction are among the mosteffective servants of clarity. Don’t be creative, be clear.Repetition and parallel construction also serve clarityat a larger level of organization. By providing the readerwith distinctive guideposts to the structure of the prose,they can diminish or eliminate the need for metacom-ments. Here, for example, are the opening sentences fromthree of the paragraphs in the earlier section on rewriting:2nd paragraph: “Rewriting is difficult for several rea-sons. First...”5th paragraph: “Rewriting is difficult for a secondreason:”6th paragraph: “Finally, rewriting is difficult becauseit...”If I had substituted synonym s for the recurring wordsor varied the gram matical structure of these opening sen-tences, their guiding function would have been lost, thereader’s sense of the section’s organization blurred. (I tryso hard to be helpful, and I bet you didn’t even notice.That, of course, is the point.)Finally, repetition and parallel construction can servestyle and creativity as well as clarity. They can providerhythm  and punch: “A sentence should contain no unnec-essary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences forthe same reason that a drawing should have no unneces-sary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts.” They canestablish metaphor: “A badly constructed building cannotbe salvaged by brightening up the wallpaper. A badlyconstructed article cannot be salvaged by changing words,inverting sentences, and shuffling paragraphs.” They canadd humor: “The word processor encourages you in theillusion that you are restructuring. Do not be fooled. Youare not. The word processor encourages you in the illu-sion that your drafts are finished manuscripts. Do not befooled. They are not.”

===== PAGE 14 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article14JargonJargon is the specialized vocabulary of a discipline,and it serves a number of legitim ate functions in scientificcommunication. A specialized term may be more general,more precise, or freer of surplus meaning than any naturallanguage equivalent (e.g., the term disposition encom-passes, and hence is more general than, beliefs, attitudes,moods, and personality attributes; reinforcement is moreprecise and freer of surplus meaning than reward). Andthe technical vocabulary often makes an important con-ceptual distinction not apprehended by the layperson’svocabulary (e.g., genotype versus phenotype).But if a jargon term does not satisfy  any of these cri-teria, opt for English. Much psychological jargon has be-come second-nature to us in the profession and servesonly to muddy our prose for the general reader. (I oncehad to interrogate an author at length to learn that a prisonprogram  for “strengthening the executive functions of theego” actually taught prisoners how to fill out job applica-tions.) Unless the jargon term  is extrem ely well known(e.g., reinforcement), it should be defined—explicitly,implicitly, or by example— the first time it is introduced.(See the sample opening statem ents earlier in this articlefor ways to do this.)Voice and Self-ReferenceIn the past, scientific writers used the passive voicealmost exclusively and referred to them selves in the thirdperson: “This experim ent was designed by the authors totest ...” This practice produces lifeless prose and is nolonger the norm . Use the active voice unless style or con-tent dictates otherwise; and, in general, keep self-reference to a minimum. Rem ember that you are not thetopic of your article. You should not refer to yourself as“the author” or “the investigator.” (You may refer to “theexperimenter” in the method section, however, even ifthat happens to be you; the experimenter is part of thetopic under discussion there.) Do not refer to yourself as“we” unless there really are two or more authors. Youmay refer to yourself as “I,” but do so sparingly. It tendsto distract the reader from  the topic, and it is better to re-main in the background. Leave the reader in the back-ground, too. Do not say, “The reader will find it hard tobelieve that ... “ or “You will be surprised to learn...”(This article violates the rule because you and your proseare the topic.) You may, however, refer to the reader indi-rectly in imperative, “you-understood” sentences: “Con-sider, first, the results for wom en.” “Note particularly thedifference between the m eans in Table 1.”In some contexts, you can use “we” to refer collec-tively to yourself and your readers: “We can see in Table1 that most of the tears...” The Publication Manual, how-ever, emphasizes that the referent of “we” must be unam-biguous; for exam ple, copy editors will object to the sen-tence “In everyday life, of course, we tend to overesti-mate...” because it is not clear just who is meant by “we.”They will accept “In everyday life, of course, we humanstend to overestim ate...” or “In everyday life, of course,human decision makers often make errors; for exam ple,we tend to overestim ate...”TenseUse the past or present perfect tense when reportingthe previous research of others (“Bandura reported...” or“Hardin has reported… ”) and past tense when reportinghow you conducted your study (“Observers were postedbehind...”) and specific past behaviors of your participants(“Two of the men talked...”). Use the present tense forresults currently in front of the reader (“As Table 2shows, the negative film is more effective ...”) and forconclusions that are more general than the specific results(“Positive emotions, then, are more easily expressedwhen...”).Avoid Language BiasLike most publishers, the APA now has extensiveguidelines for language that refers to individuals orgroups. If your article requires you to discuss any of thegroups mentioned in this section, you should probablyconsult the detailed advice in the Publication Manual(APA, 2001, pp. 61-76)Research Participants. One distinctive group of peo-ple who appear in our journal articles are those whom  westudy. It is no longer considered appropriate to objectifythem by calling them subjects. Instead use descriptiveterms that either identify them more specifically or thatacknowledge their roles as partners in the research proc-ess, such as college students, children, individuals, par-ticipants, interviewees, or respondents. You may still usethe terms subjects, subject variables, and subject samplewhen discussing statistics or (at least for now) when refer-ring to non-hum an participants.Sex and Gender. The issue of language bias comes upmost frequently with regard to sex or gender, and themost awkward problems arise from the use of masculinenouns and pronouns when the content refers to both sexes.The generic use of  man, he, his, and him to refer to bothsexes is not only misleading in many instances, but re-search shows that readers think of male persons whenthese form s are used (Martyna, 1978). Som etimes theresults are not only sexist, but humorous in their naiveandrocentrism: “Man’s vital needs include food, water,and access to fem ales” (Quoted in M artyna, 1978).In most contexts, the simplest alternative is the use ofthe plural. Instead of writing, “The individual who dis-plays prejudice in his personal relations...,” write “Indi-viduals who display prejudice in their personal relationsare ...”  Sometimes the pronoun can simply be dropped orreplaced by a sex-neutral article (the, a, or an). Instead ofwriting, “The researcher must avoid letting his precon-ceptions bias his interpretation of results,” you can write,“The researcher must avoid letting preconceptions biasthe interpretation of results.”If it is stylistically  important to focus on the singleindividual, the use of “he or she,” “him  or her,” and so

===== PAGE 15 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article15forth is acceptable but clum sy if used often. Alternatinghe and she is both confusing and distracting. Similarly,alternatives like he/she or s/he are unpronounceable andgrate on the eye. Do not use them .You may find it instructive to review how I havedealt with the pronoun problem in this article. In particu-lar, note the many references to the “reader” or “readers.”Sometimes the plural worked fine (e.g., “Don’t plungereaders into the middle of your problem . Take the time tolead them ...”), but in other instances the imagery of thesentence required the stylistic use of the singular (e.g.,“Lead the reader by the hand through a table...”). In thesecases, I have tried to minimize using the awkward “he orshe” construction.Stylistic matters aside, however, you must be accu-rate in your use of pronouns when you describe your re-search  or that of others. Readers must be explicitly  toldthe sex of experim enters, observers, and participants.When referring to males, use male pronouns; when refer-ring to females use female pronouns. (See, for exam ple,the earlier description of the Festinger-Carlsm ith study,which used male participants.) Under no circum stancesshould you omit or hide sex identity in a misguided at-tempt to be unbiased.The problem s of gender reference becom e easierwhen we move away from pronouns. Words like man andmankind are easily replaced by terms like people and hu-manity. Instead  of manning projects, we can staff them.The federal government has already desexed occupationaltitles so that we have letter carriers rather than mailmen;in private industry we have flight attendants rather thanstewardesses. And in life, children need nurturing or par-enting, not just mothering. In all these cases, you will findit easy to discover the appropriate sex-neutral term if youthink of the activity rather than the person doing it.Next, watch out for plain old stereotyping. Theauthor who asserts that “research scientists often neglecttheir wives” fails to acknowledge that wom en as well asmen are research scientists. If the author meant specifi-cally male research scientists, he (she?) should have saidso. Do not talk about ambitious men and aggressivewom en or cautious men and timid wom en if the use ofdifferent adjectives denotes not different behaviors on thepart of men and women but your stereotyped interpreta-tion of those behaviors. Do not make stereotyped as-sumptions about marital sex-roles by saying that “Theclient’s husband lets her teach part-tim e” if all you knowis that the client teaches part-time. If the bias is not yoursbut someone else’s, let the writing make that clear: “Theclient’s husband ‘lets’ her teach part-tim e.” “The husbandsays he ‘lets’ the client teach part-tim e.” “The client saysher husband lets her teach part-time.” “The client sayssarcastically that her husband ‘lets’ her teach part-time.”The client and her husband are allowed to say such things.You are not.Finally, select examples with care. Beware of yourassumptions about the sex of doctors, homemakers,nurses, and so forth. Why not: “The athlete who believ esin her ability to succeed...”? Let our writing promote theview that wom an’s vital needs are the same as man’s:food, water, and access to equality.Racial and Ethnic Identity.  Preferences for names re-ferring to racial and ethnic groups change over time. Forexample, African American and Black are currently ac-ceptable term s, whereas Negro and Afro-American arenow obsolete. Similarly, Asian and Asian American arecurrently acceptable designations, but Oriental is not. Asthese exam ples illustrate, hyphens should not be used inmultiword designations, and term s such as Black andWhite are considered proper nouns and should be capital-ized.Depending on their historical countries of origin, in-dividuals may prefer to be called Hispanic, Latino, orChicano (Latina and Chicana for women). American In-dian and Native American are both accepted terms forreferring to indigenous people of North America; but,technically, only the latter category includes Hawaiiansand Samoans. Native peoples of northern Canada, Alaska,eastern Siberia, and Greenland may prefer Inuk (plural,Inuit) to Eskimo. Alaska Natives include many groups inaddition to Eskimos. It is often relevant to be more spe-cific in describing your participants. For example, it maybe pertinent to know that they were Cuban, not just His-panic; Chinese, Vietnam ese, or Korean, not just Asian.If you are uncertain about how to describe your re-search  particip ants, ask them how they prefer to be identi-fied.Sexual Orientation.  Like terms referrin g to racial andethnic identity, terms referring to sexual orientation alsochange over time. For exam ple, the term sexual orienta-tion itself is now preferred to the older sexual prefer-ence—which implies a temporary free choice rather thanan enduring disposition. Although terms such as homo-sexual and homosexuality are still technically correct andmay be used in phrases such as “a homosexual orienta-tion” or “more Americans now accept homosexuality,”they should be avoided when referring to individuals orgroups. Instead of referring to homosexuals or bisexuals,use lesbians, gay men, or bisexual men and women. Insome contexts, the word gay can be used to include bothmen and wom en (e. g., “the gay rights movem ent”), butwhen referring to individuals or groups, retain the dis-tinction between gay m en and lesbians.Sexual orientation is not the same as sexual behavior.Not everyone who engages in a sexual act with a personof the same sex should be considered gay or lesbian, andhence you should not use the terms homosexual behavioror heterosexual behavior.  Instead, describe specific in-stances of sexual behavior using terms such as male-male,female-female, male-female, or same-gender sexual be-havior.Note the use of the word gender in the previous sen-tence. Although there are differences in usage across andwithin disciplines, the term sex is usually considered to

===== PAGE 16 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article16refer to biology; thus male and female are terms referringto sex. In contrast, gender usually refers to the culturalinterpretation or elaboration of sex; thus masculine andfeminine are terms referring to gender. This is not a hardand fast rule, however. For example, because the term sexcan be confused with sexual behavior, the term same-gender sexual behavior was used in the previous para-graph even though it refers to a sexual interaction be-tween two people of the same biological sex. The fol-lowing exam ple from  the Publication Manual also illus-trates the use of gender in a context where the term sexmight be confusing: “In accounting for attitudes towardthe bill, sexual orientation rather than gender accountedfor most of the varian ce. Most gay men and lesbians werefor the proposal; most heterosexual men and women wereagainst it (APA, 2001, p. 63).”Disabilities.  When referring to individuals with dis-abilities, maintain their integrity as individuals and humanbeings by avoiding language that equates them  with theirconditions. Don’t use nouns such as neurotics, schizo-phrenics, manic-depressives, the mentally retarded, oreven the disabled. Also avoid terms that imply victimiza-tion (e.g., “suffers from schizophrenia,” “AIDS victim”)or that can be interpreted  as a slur (e.g., cripple). In gen-eral, the preferred form s of description are “person with_______” or “person living with ______” or “person whohas________.” Challenged and special are often consid-ered euphem istic and should be used only if preferred bythose who participate in your study.There is one exception to these guidelines: the Deaf.(Note the capital “D.”) Although some individuals withreduced hearing may find the term hearing impaired ac-ceptable, many Deaf individuals do not. They regardthemselves as members of a distinctive linguistic culturethat communicates in a manual (sign) language. Accord-ingly, they take pride in referring to them selves as Deafand do not regard them selves as impaired or disabled. Donot use the terms hard of hearing or deaf mute to describethem. If your study involved Deaf participants, ask themhow they prefer to be described.Com mon Errors of G rammar and UsageThe following errors seem to me to be the most fre-quent in journal writing (listed alphabetically):Compared with versus Compared to. Similar ordersof things are compared with one another; different ordersof things are compared to one another: “Let me not com-pare thee with previous lovers I have had; rather, let mecompare thee to a summer’s day.” “Mischel’s articles areoften compared with Bandura’s articles; Bem ’s articlesare often com pared to Mozart’s sonatas.”Data. The word data is plural: “Analyze those datathoroughly.”Different from versus Different than. The first is cor-rect, the second, incorrect (although, alas for us purists,very common and gaining respectability). The confusionarises because than correctly follows comparative adjec-tives. Thus you are correct to suppose that life is morethan psychology, that living a good life is harder in manyrespects than writing a good article, and that living wellrequires broader skills than does writing well. Just re-member that life is different from psychology, that livinga good life is different in many respects from writing agood article, and that living well requires skills differentfrom those required for writing well.Since versus Because. Since means “after that.” Itshould not be used as a substitute for because if there isany ambiguity of interpretation. Wrong (but at least notambiguous): “Since the study of motivation is a high andhazardous undertaking, I wish fewer people would med-dle with it.” Better: “Because the study of motivation is ahigh and hazardous undertaking, I wish fewer peoplewould meddle with it.” Ambiguous: “Since I read Mon-taigne, I have been tempted to abandon the study of moti-vation.” This last case is correct if the writer is using sincein the temporal sense: “Ever since reading Montaigne, Ihave been tempted ...” It is incorrect if the writer meansbecause.That versus Which. That clauses (called restrictive)are essential to the meaning of the sentence; whichclauses (called nonrestrictive) merely add additional in-formation. The following example illustrates the correctuse of both words: “Dissonance theory, which has re-ceived major attention, is one of the theories that postu-lates a motivational process. Thus, if a person holds twocognitions that are inconsistent...” Most which’s in jour-nal writing are incorrect. You should go on a which huntin your own manuscripts and turn most of them intothat’s.While versus Although, But, Whereas. While means“at the same time” and in most cases cannot substitute forthese other words. Wrong: “While inferential statistics areimportant, descriptive statistics are the heart of your nar-rative.” Right: “Although inferential statistics are impor-tant, descriptive statistics are the heart of your narrative.”Or, “Inferential statistics are important, but descriptivestatistics are the heart of your narrative.” Wrong: “While Ilike personality traits, Mischel prefers a social learningapproach.” Right: “Whereas I like personality traits,Mischel prefers a social learning approach.” On the otherhand, the following usage is correct: “While I like person-ality traits, I find merit in Mischel’s social learning ap-proach.” This can be seen by substituting “at the sametime” for “while”: “I like personality traits; at the sametime, I find m erit in M ischel’s social learning approach.”Publishing Y our A rticleLong ago and far away, a journal editor allegedly ac-cepted a manuscript that required no revisions. I believethe author was William  James. In other words, if yourarticle is provisionally accepted for publication “pendingrevisions in accord with the reviewers’ comments,” youshould be deliriously happy. Publication is now virtually

===== PAGE 17 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article17under your control. If your article is rejected but you areinvited to resubm it a revised version, you should still behappy— if not deliriously so— because you still have areasonable shot at getting it published.But this is the point at which many authors give up.As one form er editor noted,in my experience as an associate editor, I thought agood deal of variance in predicting eventual publica-tion came from this phase of the process. Authors areoften discouraged by negative feedback and miss theessential positive fact that they have been asked to re-vise! They may never resubmit at all, or may let an in-ordinate amount of time pass before they do (duringwhich editors and review ers becom e unavailable, losethe thread of the project, and so forth). An oppositeproblem is that some authors become defensive andcombative, and refuse to make needed changes for noreason.So do not give up at this point. Feel free to complainto your colleagues or rail at your poodle because the stu-pid reviewers failed to read your manuscript correctly.But then turn to the task of revising your manuscript witha dispassionate, problem -solving approach. First, pay spe-cial attention to criticism s or suggestions made by morethan one reviewer or highlighted by the editor in the coverletter. These must be addressed in your revision—even ifnot in exactly the way the editor or reviewers suggest.Second, look carefully at each of the reviewers’ mis-readings. I argued earlier that whenever readers of amanuscript find something unclear, they are right; bydefinition, the writing is unclear. The problem  is thatreaders themselves do not always recognize or identifythe unclarities explicitly. Instead, they misunderstandwhat you have written and then make a criticism or offera suggestion that makes no sense. In other words, youshould also interpret reviewers’ misreadings as signalsthat your writing is unclear.Think of your manuscript as a pilot experiment inwhich the pilot participants (reviewers) did not under-stand the instructions you gave them. Analyze the reasonsfor their misunderstanding and then rewrite the problem -atic sections so that subsequent readers will not be simi-larly misled. Compared with the average journal reader,reviewers are almost always more knowledgeable aboutyour topic, more experienced in writing manuscriptsthemselves, and more conscientious about reading yourarticle. If they did not understand, neither will that aver-age reader.Third, when you send in your revised manuscript, tellthe editor in a cover letter how you have responded toeach of the criticism s or suggestions made by the review-ers. If you have decided not to adopt a particular sugges-tion, state your reasons, perhaps pointing out how youremedied the problem  in som e alternative way.Here are some fictitious examples of cover-letter re-sponses that also illustrate ways of responding to certainkinds of criticism s and suggestions within the revisionitself.1. Wrong: “I have left the section on the animalstudies unchanged. If Reviewers A and C can’t even agreeon whether the animal studies are relevant, I must be do-ing som ething right.”    Right: “You will recall that Review er A thoughtthat the anim al studies should be described more fully,whereas Reviewer C thought they should be omitted. Abiopsychologist in my departm ent agreed with ReviewerC that the anim al studies are not really valid analogs ofthe human studies. So I have dropped them  from  the textbut cited Snarkle’s review of them in an explanatory foot-note on page 26.”2.  Wrong: “Reviewer A is obviously Deborah Har-din, who has never liked me or my work. If she reallythinks that behavioral principles solve all the problem s ofobsessive-com pulsive disorders, then let her write herown article. Mine is about the cognitive processes in-volved.”     Right: “As the critical remarks by Reviewer A in-dicate, this is a contentious area, with different theoristsstaking out strong positions. Apparently I did not make itclear that my article was intended only to cover the cog-nitive processes involved in obsessive-com pulsive disor-ders and not to engage the debate between cognitive andbehavioral approaches. To clarify this, I have now in-cluded the word ‘cognitive’ in both the title and abstract,taken note of the debate in my introduction, and statedexplicitly that the article will not undertake a comparativereview of the two approaches. I hope this is satisfactory.”3.  Right: “You will recall that two of the reviewersquestioned the validity of the analysis of variance, withReviewer B suggesting that I use multiple regression in-stead. I agree with their reservations regarding theANOVA but believe that a multiple regression analysis isequally problem atic because it makes the same assum p-tions about the underlying distributions. So, I have re-tained the ANOVA, but summarized the results of a non-parametric analysis, which yields the same conclusions. Ifyou think it preferable, I could simply substitute this non-param etric analysis for the original ANOVA, although itwill be less fam iliar to the journal’s readers.”Above all, remember that the editor is your ally intrying to shape a manuscript that will be a credit both toyou and the journal. So, cooperate in the effort to turnyour sow’s ear into a vinyl purse. Be civil and make nice.You m ay not live longer, but you will publish m ore.ReferencesAmerican Psychological Association. (2001). Publicationmanual of the American Psychological Association(5th ed.). W ashington, DC: Author.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Writing the Em pirical Journal Article18Bem , D. J. (1995) W riting a review article for Psycho-logical Bulletin. Psychological Bulletin, 118, 172-177.Bem , D. J. &  Allen, A. (1974). Predicting som e of thepeople som e of the tim e: The search for cross-situational consistencies in behavior. PsychologicalReview, 81, 506-520.Bem , S. L. (1985). Androgyny and gender schem a theory:A conceptual and em pirical integration. In T. B. Son-deregger (Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation1984: The psychology of gender. Lincoln: Universityof Nebraska Press.Festinger, L. A. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.Festinger, L. &  Carlsm ith, J. M . (1959). Cognitive conse-quences of forced com pliance. Journal of Personalityand Social Psychology, 58, 203-210.Martyna, W . (1978). W hat does “He” m ean? Journal ofCommunication, 28, 131-138.de M ontaigne, M . (1943). Of the inconsistency of ouractions. In D. M . Fram e (Trans.), Selected essays,translated and with introduction and notes by DonaldM. Frame (pp. 119-126). Roslyn, NY: W alter J.Black. (Original work published 1580)Strunk, W ., Jr., &  White, E. B. (2000). The elements ofstyle (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

